Chapter 03 -- 43-45

Movements are made in response to a variety of signals. Some come from
the external environment---a traffic light changing from red to green,
the sound of a car horn, a thumbtack stepped on accidentally. Others
come from the internal environment---a suddenly remembered appointment,
an impulsive thought, a deep sentiment. Meanwhile, some movements are
automatic while others are deliberate. Withdrawing one's hand from an
unexpectedly hot stove is automatic. Giving a downbeat to a symphony
orchestra is usually more deliberate.

No matter what the signal or context for movement, virtually all
movements involve a large number of muscles (see Figure 3.1). These
muscles act on our behalf but not with our deliberation. If we had to
think about what our muscles do, we would be unable to move skillfully.
Given that we move as skillfully as we do, the main challenge in the
study of motor physiology is to understand how, from a physical
standpoint, we can move and maintain positions as adaptively and
effortlessly as we do.

The nervous system allows for skilled motor performance by relying on a
set of linked special-purpose mechanisms. At the lowest levels are
sensory receptors and muscle fibers. These structures are connected
through a variable number of synapses, or gaps, between neurons. Some of
the connections involve only a single synapse (monosynaptic
connections). Other connections involve many synapses (polysynaptic
connections). Because only a few synapses are required for some
sensorimotor loops, some motor responses to sensory inputs are extremely
rapid and automatic. The patellar tendon tap, the procedure in which the
tendon below your knee is tapped by a physician, is a familiar example.

Pathways running through the spinal cord allow for communication between
the peripheral and central nervous systems. Ascending spinal pathways
allow afferent (incoming sensory) signals from the periphery to reach
the brain. Descending spinal pathways from the brain allow efferent
(outgoing motor) signals from higher centers to reach the periphery,
where they excite or inhibit motor neurons and excite or inhibit
interneurons (neurons that synapse onto other neurons).

The brain contains a neural network consisting of 1012 to 1014 neurons,
each of which may have 104 or more synaptic connections. The brain is
not anatomically homogeneous. Even to the naked eye, distinct brain
regions can be discerned (see Figure 3.2). Through dissection and other
neuroanatomical techniques, one can see a number of cell types and
patterns of connectivity in the brain.

By recording the activity of neurons in different brain regions and by
studying the effects of lesions in various brain sites, it has been
found that there are important functional distinctions among brain
centers. Some of these centers are primarily devoted to hearing, others
are mainly dedicated to vision, others are mainly devoted to smell, and
so forth. In the domain of motor control, some centers are involved in
relatively low-level aspects of the control of movement and posture,
such as the direction and force of single limb movements. Other centers
are involved in higher-level aspects, such as the planning of extended
sequences of movements. The notion that different parts of the nervous
system provide different levels of control provides a helpful didactic
principle for reviewing motor neuroscience. To a large extent, it is the
principle around which this chapter is organized.

Some disclaimers should be offered for the review to follow. The review
is not meant to be an exhaustive treatment of motor physiology or
neuroanatomy. Knowing about these topics is important for a complete
understanding of motor neuroscience, but this book is mainly about the
psychology of human motor control. Therefore, the more modest aim of
this chapter, vis-à-vis neuroscience, is to convey a sense of the major
principles of this approach. The Further Reading section at the end of
the chapter provides pointers to more information.

Chapter 3 -- 50-55

Proprioception

Information about the position and motion of the limbs is provided both
by the overt consequences of our actions, perceived primarily through
the eyes and ears, and also from sensory receptors within the muscles,
tendons, joints, and skin. Information provided by the latter receptors
is called proprioception. Proprioceptive information specifically
related to movement is called kinesthesis. In this section, we will rely
on the term proprioception as an umbrella term for all internal sensing
of position, whether position stays constant or changes over time.

Muscle Spindles

Only some of the muscle fibers within a muscle group are powerful enough
to move or stabilize a limb. These large-diameter muscle fibers are
called extrafusal fibers (or extrafusals). In parallel with the
extrafusal fibers, and attached to them, are muscle spindles. Muscle
spindles contain small muscle fibers called intrafusal fibers (or
intrafusals). The intrafusals that make up a muscle spindle are
connected to a single extrafusal, as shown in Figure 3.6. The midsection
of the muscle spindle contains the spindle's cell nuclei, which are
housed in either a nuclear bag fiber or a nuclear chain fiber.

A sensory nerve fiber---the Ia afferent---is wrapped around the central
region of the nuclear bag fiber as well as the central region of the
nuclear chain fiber; the part of the Ia afferent surrounding the spindle
is called the primary ending. The Ia afferent responds primarily to
differences between the length of the extrafusal and the intrafusal, as
well as changes in this length difference over time (Matthews, 1972).
When an extrafusal fiber contracts relative to an intrafusal fiber, Ia
activity diminishes, but when an extrafusal fiber stretches relative to
an intrafusal, Ia activity increases. The increase in Ia activity
results in signals being sent to the spinal cord, where they can trigger
reflex responses.

Another sensory fiber---the group II afferent---is wrapped around the
peripheral region of the nuclear chain fiber, in what is called the
secondary ending. Like the Ia, the activity of the group II afferent
diminishes when the extrafusal contracts relative to the intrafusal.
Conversely, the activity of the group II afferent increases when the
extrafusal stretches relative to the intrafusal. In general, the group
II afferent is less sensitive than the Ia (Matthews, 1972; Rothwell,
1987).

For some time, it was thought that muscle spindle discharge does not
contribute to the conscious perception of muscle stretch. This belief
was prompted by the claim that awake patients undergoing routine
operations on the ankle literally could not tell when someone was
pulling their leg (Gelfan & Carter, 1967). In this study, the
investigators pulled on the long tendon of the toe muscles to determine
whether patients could tell that their tendons were being pulled. They
could not. The same result was obtained for the wrist. The long tendons
of the finger muscles were tugged and again patients seemed unaware that
this manipulation was being carried out. These findings appeared to rule
out a contribution of muscle spindle activity to the conscious
perception of muscle stretch.

Matthews and Simmonds (1974) later repeated this procedure and found
that patients could in fact detect muscle and tendon stretch quite well.
In another study not involving surgery Goodwin, McCloskey, and Matthews
(1972) applied vibration to the biceps muscle. Vibration applied to
muscle stimulates muscle spindles. Goodwin, McCloskey, and Matthews
reasoned that the vibration would activate muscle stretch receptors, so
if subjects sensed muscle stretch, they would be able to perceive the
limb as being more outstretched than it really was. This is just what
happened. As shown in Figure 3.7, when subjects positioned the
non-vibrated arm so it matched the perceived position of the vibrated
arm they overestimated the angle of the elbow joint; the subjects' eyes
were closed in this procedure. In a control condition, when subjects
were asked simply to match the position of the non-vibrated arm with the
other arm, they could do so nearly perfectly. Thus, subjects could
accurately match the positions of the two arms. The systematic errors
observed in the vibration condition suggested that muscle stretch can in
fact be perceived.

Golgi Tendon Organs

Muscles attach to other anatomical structures---bone or skin---through
tendons. Attachments of muscle to skin permit, among other things,
changes in facial expression. Dimples, it turns out, are a cute
by-product of tendon-to-skin attachments.

Within tendons are sensory receptors called Golgi tendon organs. These
receptors have distinct afferent fibers (Ib fibers) whose response
characteristics are, to a first approximation, the opposite of muscle
spindles' (see Figure 3.8). When a muscle twitches---that is, when it
undergoes a rapid, single contraction---its muscle stretch receptors
usually fire less than before the twitch. By contrast, Golgi tendon
organs fire more when the twitch begins and usually stop firing when the
twitch is over (Matthews, 1972).

For some time, it was believed that the exclusive role of Golgi tendon
organs is to signal dangerously high muscle tensions. This belief was
fostered by the impression that Golgi tendon organs have high thresholds
for firing, supposedly because it took a great deal of muscle tension to
activate Ib afferents (Rothwell, 1987). More detailed study revealed,
however, that tendon organs are in fact quite sensitive to muscle
tension. For example, Ib afferents actually respond to induced muscle
tensions of a tenth of a gram or less (Binder, Kroin, & Moore, 1977;
Houk & Henneman, 1967).

The threshold for responding to Golgi tendon organ input is modulated by
the brain. Patients with reduced communication between the spinal cord
and brain due to brain damage may show a symptom that is specifically
related to the processing of Golgi tendon organ inputs. In such
patients, or at least those with lesions of upper motor neurons, tugging
on the arm shows it to be rigid; the muscle has very high tonus.
However, if the tugging force is increased, the arm suddenly lets go.
This sudden release following earlier sustained resistance to stretch is
called the clasp knife response, by analogy to the tendency of a
jackknife to resist opening during gradually increasing force, but then
to release. The clasp knife response is due to the Golgi tendon organ's
exceeding an unusually high threshold in the patients who exhibit this
anomoly. The absence of the clasp knife response in neurologically
normal individuals is likely due to low thresholds for muscle
contraction in response to stretch of the Golgi tendon organs.

Joint Receptors

Sensory endings in the joint provide another source of proprioceptive
information. Skoglund (1956) reported that individual joint receptors
respond preferentially to different joint angles (see Figure 3.9).
Because it also appeared in this study that joint receptors adapt very
slowly, continuing to fire for a long time after a joint angle is
assumed, Skoglund proposed that joint receptors supply information about
static limb position only. Later work called this view into question.
Clark and Burgess (1975) and Grigg (1976) found that joint receptors
actually adapt quickly, though these receptors mainly fire at extreme
joint angles, as if signaling that the body is approaching a
not-very-useful position (Rothwell, 1987).

Cutaneous Receptors

When movements are made, the skin surface deforms. Standing creates
pressure sensations in the soles of the feet, and rubbing one's hand on
a table produces sensations of displacement over the skin surface. The
sensory receptors that respond to mechanical deformation of the skin are
called mechanoreceptors. Other skin receptors transmit signals that are
coded as temperature-related or painful.

Damage to cutaneous mechanoreceptors can have disruptive effects on
performance. Patients with damage to the pressure sensors in the soles
of the feet have difficulty maintaining balance if their eyes are closed
(Romberg's sign). Similarly, fine manipulations with the hands and
fingers, performed without visual feedback, become difficult if
mechanoreceptors in the skin of the hand or fingers are damaged
(Rothwell, 1987).

An indication of the tightness of the coupling between mechanoreceptor
activity and motor control is the rapidity with which people can respond
to tactile stimuli. In lifting a small object with the fingers, the grip
may tighten 80 ms after the object has slipped very slightly (Johansson
& Westling, 1988).

There has been relatively little research on the role of cutaneous
receptors in motor control. In the area of robotics, however, increasing
attention has been paid to touch because of the need for precise sensing
of mechanical disturbances in machine assembly and related tasks. Robots
that place nuts on screws perform better if equipped with sensitive
touch sensors than if they are not so equipped (Brady et al., 1986). The
Steinway piano company has found that equipping robot piano polishers
with tactile sensors enhances the robots' polishing performance (Amato,
1989).
